.S. semiconductor manufacturers,
struggling to stem a river of red ink, are increasingly looking
toward customized designs rather than mass-market chips for
future profits.
    The market for customized chips - semiconductors designed
for a very specific application or product - is expected to
expand by 25 to 30 pct this year, compared with only about six
pct for the entire integrated circuit industry.
     Market researcher Dataquest Inc estimates that sales of
customized chips totaled about 4.5 billion dlrs worldwide last
year, about 12 pct of the total chip market. By 1990, however,
customized chips are expected to represent a 12 billion to 15
billion dlr market, about 25 pct of total chip sales.
    More important for their vendors, because they are not a
standard design customized chips represent a sellers' market,
and prices and profit margins can be set accordingly.
    High volume memory chips have become "a perfect commodity
market," Robert Brodersen, a professor of electrical
engineering at the University of California at Berkeley, told
an industry forum.
    "The product is interchangeable between one manufacturer
and another and customers base their buying decisions almost
entirely on price," Brodersen said. 
    He predicted that, in the next few years, only a handful of
the world's largest chip manufacturers (most of them Japanese)
will produce memory chips, the standard electronic component
found in everything from digital watches to computers. "The
rest of the industry just won't be involved."
    Last week's International Solid State Circuits Conference,
the chip industry's annual forum for new developments, seemed
to support Brodersen's prediction.
     Of the 116 papers presented at the conference, some 40 pct
had Japanese authors, the first time they have outnumberd the
United States. Most of the Japanese chip designs were in the
memory category, including Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Co's
attention-grabbing 16 mln bit dynamic random access memory
(dram) chip, 16 times more powerful than anything now
available.